Title: Memory safe TLS with Apache on FreeBSD
Tags: SSL, Apache
Category: FreeBSD
Author: Bernard Spil
Image: /img/mod_tls.png
Summary: A memory safe alternative to the OpenSSL based Apache module providing https capability.

The new, and expirimental, Rust-based Apache httpd module `mod_tls`
has existed since Apache 2.4.52 (December 2021). The module was
commissioned by the [Prossimo Memory Safety initiative](https://www.memorysafety.org/about/),
which in turn is an [Internet Security Research Group](https://www.abetterinternet.org/)
project. 
Prossimo contracted [Stefan Eissing](https://eissing.org/), an Apache
httpd maintainer and creator of the HTTP/2 and ACME modules.

It was about time that this was made available for FreeBSD, the
not ABI-stable Rustls and Rustls-ffi libraries were blocking earlier,
but have been updated in the Apache httpd 2.4.60 release.

Let's try this again! 

So we have a new port to create, and the Apache httpd port to modify to
allow mod_tls to be built as a module.
 
# Rustls-ffi

So there I was, overcomplicating things. It's not that building Rust
doesn't take forever-and-a-day, but I'm no Rust veteran either. I
need to wrap my head around the "Rust way" of doing things every time.

No need to build `aws-lc-rs`, then `Rustls` to get to `Rustls-ffi`, just
build the thing, everything's self-contained.

Ultimately, the port does need cargo, but Rust has no concept of installing
libraries in any way. The Rustls-ffi package ships with a regular `gmake`
file for building and installing the static library. So I've had to
override the build and install make targets to make this work. The port
still depends on Rust via `USES= rust` but this is merely for creation of
the dependent crates and running the extract/patch.

So now there's the [`security/rustls-ffi`](https://www.freshports.org/security/rustls-ffi)
port. All it produces is the static library `lib/librustls.a` and the
header file `include/rustls.h`.

# Modifying the Apache port

Wiring things into the port for `mod_tls` to build was quite trivial.
Other than adding the option, the option description, a dependency
on the freshly created `rustls-ffi` port, and passing this on to apache
httpd's `configure`. Add the `mod_tls.so` to the pkg-plist conditionally
and "Bob's your uncle".

And it WORKS!

**NOTE**: To enable mod_tls, you need to enable the option for the port. It is not enabled by default since the Apache httpd project labels it as "experimental".

# Adapting your Apache config for testing

As it says on the tin: you can have either `mod_tls` *or* `mod_ssl` enabled
on an IP:port combination.

If you make your config conditional, you should be able to switch between
your `mod_ssl` and `mod_tls` config.

```apache
<IfModule !tls_module>
    SSLEngine on
    SSLCertificateFile    /etc/ssl/certs/example.org.pem
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/ssl/priv/example.org.pem
</IfModule>
<IfModule tls_module>
    TLSEngine 443
    TLSCertificate /etc/ssl/certs/example.org.pem /etc/ssl/priv/example.org.pem
</IfModule>
```

Do read the [`mod_tls` module documentation](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_tls.html)
for caveats and hints. I've settled on creating files in
`${PREFIX}/etc/apache24/modules.d` to enable/disable modules and the server
level configuration for the module. So I have a file
`${PREFIX}/etc/apache24/modules.d/002_mod_tls.conf` containing

```apache
# TLS v1.2 and v1.3 implemented in memory-safe Rust via the rustls library
#
# https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/mod_tls.html

<IfModule !ssl_module>

LoadModule tls_module libexec/apache24/mod_tls.so

<IfModule tls_module>
    TLSEngine 443
    TLSStrictSNI on
    TLSCiphersSuppress TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
</IfModule>

</IfModule>
```

and I control which module's used by commenting out the LoadModule line in
the `modules.d/001_mod_ssl.conf` file that has a similar structure.

Using [@icing](https://chaos.social/@icing)'s `mod_md` module makes this
even simpler, expect a follow-up blog-post! 
